Scientists should use deduction not induction, and aim to falsify – not prove –
their theories. Okay, to start with, let’s go back to those swans. On your walk
back from your riverside stroll, you get to thinking. How are you going to
explain your new findings that all swans are white to the world? It shouldn’t be
too hard. The evidence is on your side. You took a limited and specific data set
– four swans, in fact, practically a flock – and you drew a reasonable theory
from it. Every swan you’ve seen has been white. So, therefore, it’s only
natural, to theorize that all swans are white. It’s airtight, surely even Popper
would be on your side. This is an example of inductive reasoning, or simply
induction, and Popper opposes it strongly. The problem is that we’re using
singular statements, like “This swan is white,” to prove universal statements,
like “All swans are white.” Logically speaking, Popper argues this approach
simply isn’t valid. It’s always possible that a black swan – or a pink one, or a
yellow one – might have come swimming around that corner. That applies if you’ve
seen four swans, or 40, or all the swans you can imagine. A black swan could
always appear. Here’s a question, though: What would happen if a black swan
actually did turn up? Well, that would disprove the theory that all swans were
white. So there’s an asymmetry to the logic here: specific statements can’t
prove universal ones, but they can disprove them. That’s an important point when
it comes to Popper’s preferred scientific method – known as deduction. Rather
than starting with specifics, deduction starts with universals and examines the
relationships between them to see what other logical conclusions can be drawn.
You might say, for instance, that all birds can fly, and also that swans are
birds – and hence, you can deduce that swans can also fly. That’s logically
valid, Popper says, but that doesn’t mean it’s necessarily true. Rather, a good
scientist would be constantly on the lookout for anything that goes against
their hypothesis. They’d be looking to falsify their own theories. For instance,
if they found out about a nonflying bird like a penguin. That specific case
falsifies the general statement that all birds can fly. That shouldn’t be a
disappointing result for a scientist: in fact, it should be exciting. It’s an
intriguing new piece of information that will cause them to formulate a better,
more accurate theory. Instead of “All birds can fly,” maybe it’s “All birds have
wings.” And then, they’ll be looking everywhere for a bird with no wings to try
and then falsify that statement. In this way, falsifiability is a big deal for
Popper. It’s even what he calls the criterion of demarcation: the simple fact
that distinguishes science from nonscience. A statement is only scientifically
valid, he says, if it can potentially be falsified. Otherwise, you’re not
dealing with science at all, but rather with something much vaguer: metaphysics.
